---
layout: post
title: "Week 1: Inheriting the Project"
date: 2026-07-06
categories: capstone
---

# Week 1: Inheriting the Project

## Intro

This week marks the beginning of my Capstone Project for my Bachelor of Information Technology. This project is a chance for myself and my team members to apply our last few years of theoretical and practical learning on a real-world software product for a business client.

Going into this, I’m really looking forward to getting stuck into a project without any simulated components. In six month’s time, we’ll be delivering something slick and professional that does its job end-to-end.

Broad strokes, the project is an online platform that allows students to drill English language proficiency tests with grading/feedback performed by an LLM and validated by teachers.

We’ve inherited this project from a previous student team, who have implemented an MVP that demonstrates the product’s core functionality, with a basic front-end interface and a manual workflow for teacher validations. Our task over the next six months is to incorporate:

-   User roles and dashboards   
-   Auth / access control 
-   Subscription / billing management
-   System security and telemetry
-   A professional frontend user interface
-   A clear and modular OpenAPI contract

Essentially, our task is to expand this validated MVP into something production ready. It should be an accessible, secure and performant platform that can support multiple types of users and their associated goals.

The purpose of this blog is to keep a record of the system design and implementation challenges (and solutions) that we discover over the course of our Capstone Project. Being that I’m a student and not an engineer, I fully expect to make a bunch of mistakes that will turn out to be valuable lessons. Documenting them here is hopefully more useful than it is embarrassing.

## Getting to grips with a new codebase

Apart from a very (very) minor contribution to an open source Godot plugin, this is the first time that I’ll be working on a project that isn’t greenfield. I’ve often wondered how one gets up to speed with a legacy codebase, and it’s an especially tricky task when the authors/maintainers have moved on and the application is no longer hosted.

We were given the codebase in a ZIP archive with all of the datasets included, as well as some lengthy, well-detailed documentation about the project to date. We don’t, however, have access to any git history.

I spent some time going through the project layout trying to understand its most zoomed-out organising principles. The project had two major components:

 - A FastAPI backend with a Docker makefile, a Python script that builds out the DB using SQLAlchemy, a Gemini client that manages the boundary between the app and the LLM grading/feedback service, some utilities for ingesting/extracting data from various sources, and documentation regarding setup and deployment.
 - A mostly-vanilla, mostly-static HTML/CSS/JS frontend. Provides some templates for the backend to use (via jinja2) when displaying results.

At this early stage, given that we are pretty expressly in the requirements gathering phase of development, it’s too soon to really be getting on the tools. However, in order to have better insight into the product ahead of our first client meeting in Week 2, I decided I wanted to get a locally-hostable version up and running so we could poke around and see how it all works. The idea was that this would help us uncover useful questions for the client. Above all, though, it was going to be much easier to start to understand the codebase if we could test it in action, rather than trying to reason about how it might work hypothetically.

## Think global, act local

My extremely bare-bones approximation looked like this:

|**Deployed**|**Local**  |
|--|--|
| Live essay questions database (PostgreSQL on AWS RDS) |Four seeded test questions (SQLite) |
|FAISS vector store of ~10,000 essay records |FAISS vector store of 100 essay records |
|AWS Amplify |localhost |
|Docker image on AWS ECS Fargate |localhost|
|AWS SES SMTP |Fail quietly |
|gemini-2.0-flash |gemini-2.5-flash-lite|

And the app worked! I could:

- Choose from a (mock) variety of questions, or provide my own
- Write and submit an essay, with word counts enforced
- Receive a grading from Gemini with feedback
- View all of my past results

## So much data

Although no doubt some functionality was lost or broken by this incomplete approach, especially since I was seeding four hard-coded questions and only the first 100 rows of the vector store. The next step would be to locate and use the real datasets, but there was a lot of noise there with duplicate versions of files, huge csvs with 800,000 lines, and admittedly a lot of missing domain knowledge on my part.

When trying to detemine which dataset should be providing questions / essay prompts, I did some research on the structure of the English proficiency test, and found that there were four types of questions that should be supported by the system. Interestingly, the frontend had one of those four types commented out, and the most likely candidate for the questions dataset provided only two types instead of four. 

The type that had been disabled on the frontend asked students to respond to visual data like maps, graphs and tables, so my assumption is that this task had added complexity that ended up being out of scope for the previous team. This is something I intend to discuss with the client next week.

## Generosity

While testing my jerry-rigged local setup, one of my team members noticed that the LLM was defaulting to 9.0's across the board in all of its results. I was away from my computer at the time, but I had theorised that this may have been caused by the fact that we were only storing 100 rows in the vector store instead of ~10,000, and so the LLM wasn't being provided with enough useful example essays to calibrate its marks. 

In the end, my team member did some further digging and found that the wrong system prompt was being sent along to the LLM, and so it did not have the grading criteria it needed to give a sensible result. After fixing this, Gemini now gives us sensible essay feedback, and appropriately low scores for low-effort submissions.

## Fun with RegEx

While we are able to get the complete output from Gemini on the server, there is a hitch between the raw response and what gets recorded in the database. As a result, we are losing some of the written feedback that the model provides under each heading. We have determined that this is a regex issue, since values are being parsed out from the model's purely text response. In future, we'd like to get the model to return nice, crisp JSON instead.

In both this situation and the generous-scoring problem, I have to admit that I find it really strange to have an entire pillar of my system be this non-deterministic black box. Although in both cases, solving the problem required making sure that we were providing it with explicit instructions, which is familiar after all.

## Next week

In Week 2 I look forward to meeting the client, clarifying their hopes and expectations for our stage of the project, getting additional context on the project to date, and beginning work on a formal requirements and scoping document.