---
layout: post
title: "Week 2: Requirements Gathering"
date: 2026-07-12
categories: capstone
---

## Intro

Before we begin development work in earnest, our team is spending time ensuring that we've nailed the requirements. Crucially, this involves conversations and meetings with our client, such as the meeting we held early in Week 2. The value of this meeting was not only in getting to know the client and gaining some background on the project to date, but also in the chance to dispel some of our gathering assumptions.

## Paradigm shifts

This article will cover the second week of my Capstone Project for my Bachelor of Information Technology. You can read the first week's article [[here]], where you'll notice my first major assumption. 

Prior to meeting with the client, I had assumed that the goal of the application was to help students to practice for their English proficiency exams, with a tireless AI tutor providing instant feedback. There wasn't any real basis for this assumption in the codebase or stated requirements, I simply saw (after running some local tests) how convenient it would be for that use case. 

By discussing the client's real aspirations for the product, I came to understand that the platform is not intended as a practice tool but as a method for administering the exam itself. I'm really glad that my team and I raised this assumption and got clarity on it early. If we had carried on under our own assumptions, we might have found down the track that our solutions were ill-fitting.

Another major assumption was cleared up regarding user roles and their relationships. The stated requirements outline three key user roles that our phase of the project needs to support, with dashboards and supported workflows:

- Students
  - Submit essays for grading
  - View submission history and results
  - Track progress over time
- Teachers
  - Validate grading from the AI model
  - Apply manual corrections when necessary
- Administrators
  - Manage users
  - Generate reports
  - Monitor system health telemetry

Over my last few years doing system design exercises at uni, I have come to quickly associate Student and Teacher users as having the classic multiplicity: 1 Teacher teaches 0...N Students, probably in a classroom setting. Again, I'm glad we brought this up with the client, since they were able to clarify for us that a Teacher in this context refers to _staff_ teachers rather than _client_ teachers.

The important difference here is that staff teachers are qualified experts belonging to the platform itself. They're responsible for validating the feedback and grading given by the model. As such, they don't have a one to many relationship with a "classroom" of students, but rather 0...N Teachers will validate feedback on submissions from 0...N Students. These teachers are domain experts whose role is to provide quality assurance for the platform by verifying that the model is grading essays in line with the specific criteria of the exam.

No doubt this process of requirements gathering will be ongoing. Ideally we should have the biggest questions answered as early as possible so that the blast radius of future changes or interpretations is minimised. Our plan for managing this is to keep open and regular communication with the client, and to remain vigilant about what things we understand, and what things we simply assume.

## Scoping

At the moment, we are preparing our formal Requirements & Scoping document which will help us to set expectations about the work we'll deliver and the timeline we'll deliver it in. Our client meeting confirmed for us that the trained model and basic backend functionality are mostly settled. We should be focusing on implementing the role-based workflows that will allow real users to interface with what has so far been a product demonstration.

There is some amount of work left to be done on the model however, as I mentioned last week. We will be expanding the model's capabilities to include writing tasks with tabular prompts, and to output structured JSON.

We have determined that a few things are out of scope for us, given the time constraints and the stated focus of our portion of the project:

- Payment processor integration
- Organisational user dashboards and workflows
- Support for grading exams in other categories
- Native iOS / Android applications

## Next week

The next couple of weeks will be a continuation of this requirements gathering process, with work beginning in earnest in Week 6.

